docs/PhotoViewer.md, before:

# raspiCamSrv Photo Viewer

[![Up](img/goup.gif)](./UserGuide.md)

All photos, raw photos or videos taken wit **raspiCamSrv** are stored in a camera-specific folder on the server.

Currently, the folder is located within the folder where Flask expects static content.   
The full path of the folder for the active camera is shown in the [Settings](./Settings.md) screen.

The current implementation of **raspiCamSrv** includes a very simple viewer which allows to inspect the available files:

![Photos](img/Photos.jpg)

On the left side, a chunk of photos (placeholders for raw and video) are shown in reverse order with the newest one on top.

The file name in the photo (or placeholder) shows the correct filename of the resource represented by the picture.

Below the list, there is a pagination infrastructure allowing to select specific pages or go forward or backward.

The page size (chunk size) can be specified in the [Settings](./Settings.md) screen.

A large view of the photo or a video player is presented when a specific picture has been clicked on.

Commit message:

V2.9.0 - Deletion and Download of photos

docs/PhotoViewer.md, after:

# raspiCamSrv Photo Viewer

[![Up](img/goup.gif)](./UserGuide.md)

All photos, raw photos or videos taken wit **raspiCamSrv** are stored in a camera-specific folder on the server.

Currently, the folder is located within the folder where Flask expects static content    
(```~/home/prgraspi-cam-srv/raspiCamSrv/static/photos/camera_n``` (n=0, 1)).   
The full path of the folder for the active camera is shown in the [Settings](./Settings.md) screen.

The current implementation of **raspiCamSrv** includes a very simple viewer which allows inspecting the available photos and videos as well as downloading and deleting selected files:

![Photos](img/Photos.jpg)

On the left side, a selection of photos (.jpg placeholders for raw and video) are shown in a scroll area in reverse order with the newest one on top.

The file name in the photo (or placeholder) shows the correct filename of the resource represented by the picture.

A large view of the photo or a video player is presented when a specific picture has been clicked on.

- You need to select the **Camera** for which photos shall be shown.<br>In systems with multiple cameras, photos taken with a camera are stored in a camera-specific folder.
- **From** and **To** date selectors allow restricting photos to a specific range of dates<br>When initially starting the dialog, the current day is selected.<br>Internally, **From** has time 00:00:00 and **To** 23:59:59.
- Button **Today** restricts the time range to the current date
- Button **All** sets **From** to January 1st, 1970 and **To** to today.
- On the left of each thumbnail picture, there is a **checkbox** where you can select photos or videos for download or for deletion.
- Buttons **Select all** and **Deselect all** apply to all photos currently shown in the scrolling area.
- With button **Delete** you can delete all selected photos<br>Before deletion is executed, a confirmation is required.<br>If a specific media (e.g. video or raw photo) incudes the media file itself, a jpg placeholder and an optional histogram file, all are deleted.<br>Deletion of photos also clears the [Photo Display Buffer](./Phototaking.md#photo-display).
- With the **Download** button, you can download the selected files.<br>Also here, a confirmation is required.<br>If more than one file has been selected, the selected files will be zipped into a file named *raspiCamSrvMedia_YYYYMMDD_HHMMSS.zip*<br>If a single file is selected, it will be downloades as is.<br>Placeholders for raw and videos as well as histogram are not included in the download.
