docs/UserGuide.md, before:

# RaspiCamSrv User Guide

[![Up](img/goup.gif)](../README.md)

**NOTE**     
For a full understanding of application details, users should familiarize with the official document [Raspberry Pi - The Picamera2 Library](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/camera/picamera2-manual.pdf).  
The document version, on which this raspiCamSrv release is based, is also included in this documentation: [picamera2-manual.pdf](./picamera2-manual.pdf)

When the server on a Pi is running and the Pi is reacheable through the network (usually WiFi), you can connect with a browser using the Pi address ('raspi05' in the example below) with the Flask port number, usually 5000, e.g.:  
```http://raspi05:5000```

The system will request an initial [registration and a login](./Authentication.md) and subsequently open the **Live** application screen.

For error handling, see [raspiCamSrv Troubleshooting](./Troubelshooting.md)

## Application Screen
![Main Screen](img/Live_start.jpg)

### Elements

#### Title bar
On the right side, the title bar shows
- the current server connection
- the active camera as advertised by Picamera2
- the active user

On the left side, the title bar shows the application name (raspiCamSrv) and the current screen.

#### Main Menu
The main menu (black background) allows navigation to different screens
- **Live** shows the [Live Screen](./LiveScreen.md) which includes functionality for image control as well as photo- and video taking
- **Config** gives access to camera [Configuration](./Configuration.md) where basic camera configurations can be specified for different scenarios.
- **Info** opens the [Camera Information](./Information.md) page with information on installed cameras as well as Properties and Sensor Modes of the active camera.
- **Photos** shows the [Photos](./PhotoViewer.md) where the currently available photos and videos can be browsed and inspected in detail.
- **Photoseries** opens the [Photo Series](./PhotoSeries.md) page for control of photo series.
- **Trigger** Allows configuring and controlling [triggered video and/or photo taking](./Trigger.md)
- **Web Cam** opens the [Web Cam](./Webcam.md) page showing web cam features of **raspiCamSrv**
- **Settings** opens the [Settings](./Settings.md) page where some basic server parameters can be configured and where the active camera can be switched in case the Raspberry Pi device supprts multiple cameras (such as Pi 5).
- **Log Out** will log the active user out and direct to the [Log-In Screen](./Authentication.md#log-in)

#### Process Status indicators

On the right side of the menu bar there is a group of statis indicators for the different [background ptocesses](./Background%20Processes.md):

![Status Indicators](./img/ProcessIndicator1.jpg)

![Status Indicators](./img/ProcessIndicator3.jpg)

From right to left, these indicate the status of

- Live stream thread
- Video thread
- Recording [audio](./Settings.md#recording-audio-along-with-video) along with video
- [Photo Series](./PhotoSeries.md) thread
- [Motion Capture](./Trigger.md) thread

Red color indicates that a process is active whereas gray indicates that it is inactive.    
In the case of motion capture, yellow color indicates that the process is active but currently not scheduled to register events

![MotionPaused](./img/ProcessIndicator8.jpg)

#### Message Line
At the bottom of the screen, there is a message line where application messages will be shown when necessary.

## Streaming

**raspiCamSrv** supports streaming MJPEG video.

The straming URL is   
```http://<server>:<port>/video_feed``` for MJPEG video   
```http://<server>:<port>/photo_feed``` for photo snapshots      
Both URLs can be accessed without authentication.

In the web client, an active streaming server is indicated with the process status indicators as    
![ProcessStatusIndicator](./img/ProcessIndicator1.jpg)   
A live stream is shown in in the [Live Screen](./LiveScreen.md)

The streaming server is automatically shut down if no client has been streaming within the last 10 seconds.   
For example if one is working in other dialogs rather than *Live Screen*, straming is not used and the streaming server is shut down, which is indicated by   
![ProcessStatusIndicator](./img/ProcessIndicator0.jpg)   
Streaming is automatically reactivated, if a streaming client connects, for example if the *Live Screen* is activated.

Other clients, either connecting directly through the streaming URL or by using the **raspiCamSrv** web client, will also activate the streaming server.

Streaming can be deactivated, if a **raspiCamSrv** task is executed which requires exclusive access to the camera because of a specific [Configuration](./Configuration.md) which is not compliant with the configuration required for streaming (for more details, see [raspiCamSrv Tasks and Background Processes](./Background%20Processes.md)).

Commit message:

V2.3.0 Streaming both cameras - see release notes

docs/UserGuide.md, after:

# RaspiCamSrv User Guide

[![Up](img/goup.gif)](../README.md)

**NOTE**     
For a full understanding of application details, users should familiarize with the official document [Raspberry Pi - The Picamera2 Library](https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/camera/picamera2-manual.pdf).  
The document version, on which this raspiCamSrv release is based, is also included in this documentation: [picamera2-manual.pdf](./picamera2-manual.pdf)

When the server on a Pi is running and the Pi is reacheable through the network (usually WiFi), you can connect with a browser using the Pi address ('raspi05' in the example below) with the Flask port number, usually 5000, e.g.:  
```http://raspi05:5000```

The system will request an initial [registration and a login](./Authentication.md) and subsequently open the **Live** application screen.

For error handling, see [raspiCamSrv Troubleshooting](./Troubelshooting.md)

## Application Screen
![Main Screen](img/Live_start.jpg)

### Elements

#### Title bar
On the right side, the title bar shows
- the current server connection
- the active camera as advertised by Picamera2
- the active user

On the left side, the title bar shows the application name (raspiCamSrv) and the current screen.

#### Main Menu
The main menu (black background) allows navigation to different screens
- **Live** shows the [Live Screen](./LiveScreen.md) which includes functionality for image control as well as photo- and video taking
- **Config** gives access to camera [Configuration](./Configuration.md) where basic camera configurations can be specified for different scenarios.
- **Info** opens the [Camera Information](./Information.md) page with information on installed cameras as well as Properties and Sensor Modes of the active camera.
- **Photos** shows the [Photos](./PhotoViewer.md) where the currently available photos and videos can be browsed and inspected in detail.
- **Photoseries** opens the [Photo Series](./PhotoSeries.md) page for control of photo series.
- **Trigger** Allows configuring and controlling [triggered video and/or photo taking](./Trigger.md)
- **Web Cam** opens the [Web Cam](./Webcam.md) page showing web cam features of **raspiCamSrv**
- **Settings** opens the [Settings](./Settings.md) page where some basic server parameters can be configured and where the active camera can be switched in case the Raspberry Pi device supprts multiple cameras (such as Pi 5).
- **Log Out** will log the active user out and direct to the [Log-In Screen](./Authentication.md#log-in)

#### Process Status indicators

On the right side of the menu bar there is a group of statis indicators for the different [background ptocesses](./Background%20Processes.md):

![Status Indicators](./img/ProcessIndicator1.jpg)

![Status Indicators](./img/ProcessIndicator3.jpg)

From right to left, these indicate the status of

- Live stream thread for active camera
- Video thread
- Recording [audio](./Settings.md#recording-audio-along-with-video) along with video
- [Photo Series](./PhotoSeries.md) thread
- [Motion Capture](./Trigger.md) thread
- Live stream thread for the other camera, if available (see [Webcam](./Webcam.md))

Red color indicates that a process is active whereas gray indicates that it is inactive.    
In the case of motion capture, yellow color indicates that the process is active but currently not scheduled to register events

![MotionPaused](./img/ProcessIndicator8.jpg)

#### Message Line
At the bottom of the screen, there is a message line where application messages will be shown when necessary.

## Streaming

**raspiCamSrv** supports streaming MJPEG video.

The straming URL is   
```http://<server>:<port>/video_feed``` for MJPEG video   
```http://<server>:<port>/photo_feed``` for photo snapshots      
Both URLs can be accessed without authentication.

In the web client, an active streaming server is indicated with the process status indicators as    
![ProcessStatusIndicator](./img/ProcessIndicator1.jpg) if only the active camera is streaming or   
![ProcessStatusIndicator](./img/ProcessIndicator10.jpg) if both cameras are streaming or     
![ProcessStatusIndicator](./img/ProcessIndicator11.jpg) if if only the other (not active) camera is streaming     

A live stream is shown in in the [Live Screen](./LiveScreen.md) for the active camera or on the [Webcam](./Webcam.md) page for both cameras.

The streaming servers are automatically shut down if no client has been streaming within the last 10 seconds.   
This is independently controlled for both cameras.   
For example if one is working in other dialogs rather than *Live Screen*, straming is not used and the streaming servers are shut down, which is indicated by   
![ProcessStatusIndicator](./img/ProcessIndicator0.jpg)   
Streaming is automatically reactivated, if a streaming client connects, for example if the *Live Screen* is activated.

Other clients, either connecting directly through the streaming URL or by using the **raspiCamSrv** web client, will also activate the streaming servers.

Streaming of the active camera can be deactivated, if a **raspiCamSrv** task is executed which requires exclusive access to the camera because of a specific [Configuration](./Configuration.md) which is not compliant with the configuration required for streaming (for more details, see [raspiCamSrv Tasks and Background Processes](./Background%20Processes.md)).
